added ado alerts doc (#9)
mt-sre/mt-sre.github.io: content/en/docs/internal-documentation/tutorials/adding_ado_alerts.md

---
title: Adding ADO alerts
linkTitle: Adding ADO alerts
---

> This guide describes how to add alerts for addon-operator in OSD RHOBS tenant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to add alerts for addon-operator in the OSD RHOBS tenant.
```

## Background

Since the addon-operator doesn’t have a specific tenant in RHOBS with a service account,

> the addon-operator metrics are scraped to OSD tenant with its own service account,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the addon-operator metrics are scraped to the OSD tenant with its own service account,
```

so instead of adding rules using [obsctl cli](https://github.com/observatorium/obsctl) and
syncing them using [obsctl-reloader](https://github.com/rhobs/obsctl-reloader)
SRE-P has a repo called [rhobs-rules-and-dashboards](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards)

> which based on the tenant will automatically sync rules defined in the repo to app-interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which, based on the tenant, will automatically sync rules defined in the repo to app-interface.
```

## Overview

> we need to have the following prerequisites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to have the following prerequisites:
```

If the tenant is not defined in the repo, we need to follow the process defined
[here](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards/-/tree/main/rules#registering-a-new-tenant)

> which explains how to register the tenant in the app-interface and how to define obsctl-reloader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which explains how to register the tenant in app-interface and how to configure obsctl-reloader
```

to sync rules for the particular tenant.

> Since osd tenant is already registered and the obsctl-reloader configuration is already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the OSD tenant is already registered and the obsctl-reloader configuration is already
```

Reviewer: Should "Since" be in this sentence?

Author: I don't think we should have Since there, removing it now

defined [here](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/app-interface/-/blob/master/data/services/rhobs/observatorium-mst/cicd/saas.yaml#L127)
(we should see osd in **MANAGED_TENANTS** parameter in the **observatorium-mst-common** named
item and secrets are defined [here](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/app-interface/-/blob/master/data/services/rhobs/observatorium-mst/namespaces/app-sre-stage-01/observatorium-mst-stage.yml#L79))

## Steps

we can define rules for the addon-operator metrics in the [rhobs-rules-and-dashboards](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards)
repo in the [rules/osd](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards/-/tree/main/rules/osd)

> folder (the tenants are added as specific folders) and tests for the prometheus rules are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
folder (the tenants are added as individual folders) and tests for the prometheus rules are
```

defined in the [tests/rules/osd](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards/-/tree/main/test/rules/osd)
folder.

> The suggested way to add folder names and rules filenames for an alert is explained [here](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards/-/tree/main/rules#one-folder-per-targeted-rhobs-tenant).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The suggested file naming conventions are described [here](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards/-/tree/main/rules#one-folder-per-targeted-rhobs-tenant).
```

> tldr: create file name with `.prometheusrule.yaml` as suffix at the end,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tldr: create a file name with `.prometheusrule.yaml` as a suffix,
```

> add tenant label for the `PrometheusRule` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
add tenant label to the `PrometheusRule` object.
```

### Adding promrules

> For creating a PoC alert we have selected `addon_operator_addon_health_info` metric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For creating a PoC alert we have selected the `addon_operator_addon_health_info` metric
```

> since it basically explains the addon health for particular `version` and `cluster_id`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
since it basically explains the addon health for a particular `version` and `cluster_id`.
```

The metrics for creating alerts can be decided and the promql queries
can be tested out from [promlens stage](https://promlens.stage.devshift.net)
or [promlens prod](https://promlens.devshift.net).
The metrics are scraped from addon-operator to

> observatorium-mst-stage (stage) / observatorium-mst-prod (prod) datasource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the observatorium-mst-stage (stage) / observatorium-mst-prod (prod) datasources.
```

> Sample `addon_operator_addon_health_info` metric data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sample `addon_operator_addon_health_info` metric data:
```

```yaml
addon_operator_addon_health_info{_id="08d94ae0-a943-47ea-ac29-6cf65284aeba", container="metrics-relay-server", endpoint="https", instance="10.129.2.11:8443", job="addon-operator-metrics", name="managed-odh", namespace="openshift-addon-operator", pod="addon-operator-manager-7c9df45684-86mh4", prometheus="openshift-monitoring/k8s", receive="true", service="addon-operator-metrics", tenant_id="770c1124-6ae8-4324-a9d4-9ce08590094b", version="0.0.0"}
```

> The particular metric gives information about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This particular metric gives information about
```

`version`, `cluster_id (_id)` and `addon_name (name)` which can be used to create the alert.

- We should ignore the metrics with version `"0.0.0"`
- The addon health is `"Unhealthy"` if no version exists for the particular
addon with [value 1](https://github.com/openshift/addon-operator#monitoring-and-metrics)
- In theory, the latest version for the particular addon

> should have value of 1 if not then the addon is `"Unhealthy"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should have the value of 1. If not, then the addon is `"Unhealthy"`
```

The prometheus rule for the addon_operator_addon_health_info metric is defined [here](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards/-/blob/main/rules/osd/addon-operator-addon-health-info-rules.prometheusrule.yaml)

```yaml

> expr: (count by (name, _id) (addon_operator_addon_health_info{version!="0.0.0"})) - (count by (name,_id) (addon_operator_addon_health_info{version!="0.0.0"} == 0)) == 0

Reviewer: Is this expression the same as
```
(count by (name,_id) (addon_operator_addon_health_info{version!="0.0.0"} != 0)) == 0
```
?

Author: so the promql won't return anything if `addon_operator_addon_health_info{version!="0.0.0"} != 0` doesn't return any hits. so subtracting 0 value metrics from everything is the way

Author: I tested this out, in the prom tests

Reviewer: Ohhh yeah I understand :) Okay cool!

```

Explanation:

> aggregating the metrics using `name, _id`
> we need to raise an alert for the metric with an `id, name` which does not have at least
> one value of 1 in the aggregated metrics for the particular name, _id
> 
> from the entire addon_operator_addon_health_info metrics aggregated by count
> `[(count by (name, _id) (addon_operator_addon_health_info{version!="0.0.0"}))]`
> subtract the metrics having 0 values
> `[(count by (name, _id) (addon_operator_addon_health_info{version!="0.0.0"} == 0))]`
> if the result is `0` value that means the metric does not have any other values except `0`
> raise the alert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We aggregate all metrics on `name` and `_id` and count the non-0 value metrics. If the count is 0 (implying there has been no non-0 value metrics), raise the alert.
```

### Writing tests for the promrules

> Create a `<alertname>.promrulestests.yaml` in the test/rules/<tenant>/ folder,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First create a `<alertname>.promrulestests.yaml` file in the `test/rules/<tenant>/` folder.
```

> it is advised to test out different scenarios for the edge cases so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is advised to test out different scenarios for the edge cases so
```

that the expr defined in the rules/<tenant> folder will raise alert if say the addon is `"Unhealthy"`.
Try out different scenarios by defining different series as
input to the test rules such as [here](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/rhobs-rules-and-dashboards/-/blob/main/test/rules/osd/addon-operator-addon-health-info-rules.prometheusrulestests.yaml#L8).

> The  tests can be validated by running: `make test-rules`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tests can be validated by running: `make test-rules`
```

in the rhobs-rules-and-dashboards directory.
NOTE: Make sure that the tests are defined in the tests/rules/<tenant> folder

> Since the pagerduty config is defined per tenant basis which is `osd tenant` in this case,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the pagerduty config is defined on a per tenant basis which is `osd tenant` in this case,
```

the alert will be triggered and paged to SRE-P,

> so a proper runbook should be added redirecting the alert to lp-sre folks.

Reviewer: Is this a TODO?

Author: no we have already added the runbook for the alert
